lecture 12

Stereo Geometry
    When two cameras view a 3D scene from two distinct positions and you try to figure out depth from this
    if we can identify the corresponding point, depth can be computed by triangulation
    The word ”stereo” comes from the Greek word ”stereos” which means firm or solid.
    words 
        Vergence 
            angle 2μ - angle between principal directions.
                the angle (right-eye - fixation point - left-eye) 
        Gaze (version) 
            angle γ - angle between primary direction and the ray from the cyclopean eye to the fixation point.
                the angle (fixation point - cyclopean eye - cyclopedian eye looking straight forward)
        baseline (Tx)
            the distance between the two cameras 
    math
        Z = f Tx / d
            Z = depth 
            Tx = baseline 
            d = disparity 
                Binocular disparity refers to the difference in image location of an object seen by the left and right eyes
            important equation from page 17, 19
            note: depth and stereo disparity are inversly proportional
                if you hold a finger in front of you and alternate opening an eye, the finger shifts much. However, at longer depth, finger shifts less. 
            note: depth is proportional to the baseline t 
                if we have bigger distance between our eyes when alternating eyes, the finger shifts more.
            note: the depth error depends quadratically on the depth 
                proof on page 22
                trade-off: wider baselines pros and cons (page 22)
        epipolar
            Epipolar plane
                a plane through a point X and the optical centers (picture on slide 23)
                    The projection of the optical center o′(o) is called the epipole p(p′).
                    Note: Any epipolar plane projects to a line that goes through the epipole. Such a line is called an epipolar line.
            epipolar transform
                The map from points in one image plane to epipolar lines in the other image plane is called the epipolar transform
                    q → L'(q)
        the two important matrixes
            the essential matrix E
                Essential matrix E relates image coordinates
                E = RTt
                formulas on page 26
                the epipolar constraint: q'^T Eq = 0
                    Tt = matrix on page 27
            the fundamental matrix F
                Fundamental matrix F relates pixel coordinates
                F = K'^-T EK^−1
            usage 
                Given a point in one image, multiplying by the essential or fundamental matrix will tell us which epipolar line to search along in the second view


determining the essential matrix
    use features (e.g. SIFT) matched between the two images 
    the essential matrix depends on
        Rotation R (3 params)
        Translation t (3 params)
    the matrix is however homogeneous in components of t
        => in total, 5 unknowns 

bundle adjustments: multiple cameras
    if we have K cameras with unknown projections matrixes and such 
        we can build an equation system, suddenly it is a minimization problem to compute the essential matrices
        page 31
    ColMap
        Feature extraction, matching and bundle adjustment using ColMap

establishing correspondence - problems:
    occlusions
        some part of scene are only seen by one camera
            the right eye cannot see behind the left edge of a box
    illumination, perspective, texture,  

Stereopsis in biological vision
    images from right and left eye are merged
    object in front of- or behind the fixation target (or fixation point) give rise to diplopia (double vision)

Corresponding points
    the two points on the left-eye and right-eye retina which receive the same world-point 

The cyclopean eye 
    The cyclopean eye is an imaginary eye situated midway between the two eyes.
    Used to determine directions of point A and B - point A stimulating temporal retina of right eye and nasal retina of left eye.

disparity map
    map of how far away structures are (white=close, gray=middle, black=far)
    if we plot the disparity space (image), the only real values lie on the diagonal
        because we want to ignore matches that are behind the camera or too close(?)
        this is explained on page 45




